dictionary quizzes one good fact
subscribe
entertainment pop culture
geography travel
health medicine
lifestyles social issues
literature
philosophy religion
politics law government
science
sports recreation
technology
visual arts
world history
on this day in history
quizzes
podcasts
games
dictionary
biographies
summaries
top questions
week in review
infographics
demystified
lists
#wtfact
companions
image galleries
spotlight
the forum
one good fact
entertainment pop culture
geography travel
health medicine
lifestyles social issues
literature
philosophy religion
politics law government
science
sports recreation
technology
visual arts
world history
britannica classics
check out these retro videos from encyclopedia britannica’s archives
demystified videos
in demystified britannica has all the answers to your burning questions
#wtfact videos
in #wtfact britannica shares some of the most bizarre facts we can find
this time in history
in these videos find out what happened this month or any month! in history
britannica explains
in these videos britannica explains a variety of topics and answers frequently asked questions
buying guide
expert buying advice from tech to household and wellness products
student portal
britannica is the ultimate student resource for key school subjects like history government literature and more
covid-19 portal
while this global health crisis continues to evolve it can be useful to look to past pandemics to better understand how to respond today
100 women
britannica celebrates the centennial of the nineteenth amendment highlighting suffragists and history-making politicians
britannica beyond
we’ve created a new place where questions are at the center of learning go ahead ask we won’t mind
saving earth
britannica presents earth’s to-do list for the 21st century learn about the major environmental problems facing our planet and what can be done about them!
spacenext50
britannica presents spacenext50 from the race to the moon to space stewardship we explore a wide range of subjects that feed our curiosity about space!
indonesia
indonesia
introduction quick facts
land
relief
islands of the sunda shelf
islands of the sahul shelf
celebes and the moluccas
volcanoes
drainage
soils
climate
plant and animal life
people
ethnic groups
western islands
eastern islands
chinese and other indonesian peoples
languages
religions
settlement patterns
rural settlement
urban settlement
demographic trends
economy
agriculture forestry and fishing
resources and power
manufacturing
finance
trade
services
labour
transportation and telecommunications
roads and railways
water and air transport
telecommunications
government and society
constitutional framework
local government
justice
political process
security
health and welfare
housing
education
cultural life
cultural milieu
the arts
literature
theatre and dance
music
visual arts
cultural institutions
sports and recreation
media and publishing
history
the archipelago: its prehistory and early historical records
indonesian “hinduism”
the arrival of hindu religious conceptions
indonesian religious conceptions
the malay kingdom of srivijaya-palembang
buddhism in palembang
the maritime influence
central java from c 700 to c 1000
eastern java and the archipelago from c 1000 to c 1300
government and politics
the empire of kertanagara
the majapahit era
islamic influence in indonesia
muslim kingdoms of northern sumatra
muslims in java
expansion of european influence
growth and impact of the dutch east india company
the french and the british in java 1806–15
dutch rule from 1815 to c 1920
the culture system
dutch territorial expansion
the ethical policy
toward independence
the rise of nationalism
japanese occupation
the revolution
independent indonesia to 1965
the years of constitutional democracy
introduction of guided democracy
sukarno’s policies
indonesia from the coup to the end of the new order
the coup
suharto’s new order
economic development
political developments
changes in indonesian society
international relations
economic crisis public unrest and the fall of suharto
indonesia after suharto
fast facts
2-min summary
facts stats
media
videos
images
audio
more
additional reading
more articles on this topic
contributors
article history
security of indonesia
the indonesian armed forces were founded shortly after the country’s declaration of independence in august 1945 the original forces were made up of soldiers who had been trained by the dutch and japanese armies as well as the armed militia groups that had fought a guerrilla war to wrest indonesia permanently from dutch control under the sukarno and suharto presidencies the armed forces of the republic of indonesia angkatan bersenjata republik indonesia; abri comprised the army the navy the air force and the police

following the suharto presidency the armed forces returned to one of their pre-sukarno names the national army of indonesia tentara nasional indonesia; tni and the police were split into a separate unit the army constituting more than three-fourths of the forces has remained the largest segment of the tni men must be at least 18 years old to join the armed forces; selective compulsory service requires a commitment of two years

the political role of the armed forces increased significantly in the second half of the 20th century with the abri and later the tni justifying their political involvement by citing the so-called dwi-fungsi dual function doctrine this doctrine declared it both the right and the duty of the military to take part in most political decision-making processes in indonesia

as the political power of the military grew however the allocation of state funds for defense development declined the government’s rationale in cutting its military spending was to promote peaceful relations with neighbouring countries; it meant to establish territorial control through political intervention with the aid of a powerful intelligence network rather than through the use of force

its small budget ultimately forced the tni to find other sources of income widespread corruption ensued as the military abused its associations with foundations and government firms finally the tni was removed from the political process with the reformation of the mpr in 2004: all seats in the legislature that were once reserved for the military were eliminated

health and welfare
indonesia has a national health care network that offers treatment either free of charge or for a nominal cost through several types of medical facilities district medical centres the most comprehensive of which combine general medical clinics with maternal and child-health centres provide services in family planning school health nutrition communicable-disease control health statistics environmental health health education dental health and public-health nursing the district centres also supervise the community and village health centres puskesmas which are the primary health providers in rural areas a third type of public medical facility is the posyandu an integrated health-service post that is designed to serve those whose health is most at risk these posts are more widely available than the village health centres and offer a variety of services to women and children in particular ranging from immunizations and nutrition counseling to family planning

in general the cost of specialized health care as provided by private hospitals and doctors is beyond the reach of indonesians in both the low- and middle-income groups a government-sponsored health insurance system for specialized care was introduced in the late 20th century but has been slow to cover people working in small private companies or in the informal sector many companies provide medical assistance to employees but there is no legal requirement to do so

most of the major communicable diseases in indonesia are well under control malaria and tuberculosis are no longer persistent health problems but outbreaks of dengue and cholera still occur heart problems and strokes have become more common owing at least in part to changes in diet that have accompanied economic growth since the 1970s cancer also has become more widespread drug addiction has increased notably particularly among young people in the urban centres and there has been a sharp rise in hiv infection and cases of aids especially since the end of the 20th century

one of the most serious public health problems is the shortage of medical and paramedical personnel mainly nurses and midwives although all new graduates of the government’s medical schools are required to work for one year in rural areas few doctors choose to stay in such regions after fulfilling their service obligation outside the major urban centres many people use traditional healers called dukun an indigenous midwife paraji or dukun beranak often with limited training assists many of the births in indonesia; extensive training programs have been implemented to bring the paraji toward the standards of qualified midwives such programs contributed to a significant drop in the infant mortality rate—from well above to well below the world average—from the mid-20th to the early 21st century

another important public health issue family planning keluarga berancana; commonly called “kb” conceptually runs counter to traditional views and there was much resistance to such programs when they were introduced a massive attempt has been made to provide information on family planning to women of childbearing age typically through clinics that are run by the department of health this program has achieved considerable success particularly in java and bali and has come to be considered a model in asia
Indonesia’s Poverty Situation during the COVID-19 Pandemic
26 July 2021
Insight
Poverty & Inequality
Highlights
Indonesia’s COVID-19 daily case numbers continued to increase throughout  2020 and into early 2021 and was accompanied by the implementation of a social restriction policy.
The economy has not completely recovered to prepandemic levels.
Indonesia’s poverty rate declined slightly from 10.19% in September 2020 to 10.14% in March 2021, but this rate is still higher than it was before the pandemic (9.2% in September 2019).
Households have used various coping mechanisms to meet their daily needs, such as selling assets or reducing expenditure.
Social assistance programs can ease the burden on households during crises resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.


The COVID-19 Pandemic Is Not Over Yet
Indonesia has so far been unable to control the COVID-19 pandemic. Since the announcement of its first COVID-19 case in March 2020, reported daily cases have continued to increase during 2020 and through into 2021. From the current situation, it is clear that Indonesians cannot yet enjoy a full return to the living conditions experienced before the pandemic struck.


Indonesia's Economy Has Not Totally Recovered Yet
Indonesia’s economy has entered crisis state since the 2nd quarter of 2020. Two reasons are behind this crisis. First, increasingly more of the population (including those who are productive) are becoming infected with COVID-19. This lowers households’ ability to fulfill their daily needs, particularly for those directly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Second, the social restrictions imposed by the government have prevented the economy from operating at 100% of its full capacity with a number of businsses having to close down and workers be temporarily laid-off.

One indicator of the economic crisis is the economic growth rate. On 5 May 2021, Statistics Indonesia released a report that Indonesia’s economic growth rate in the 1st quarter of 2021 was -0.74%. The economic conditions during this period were much worse than before the pandemic, even though it showed improvement when compared to the economic situation in 2020. This indicates that Indonesia’s economy is still well below the normal rates of the period before the pandemic began. At the same time, the rate of growth of the per-capita national income (the measurement of national average welfare) also decreased by 3.15% in 2020. This indicated that there has been a decline in the level of household welfare in Indonesia in 2020 in comparison with 2019.



Poverty Rate Barely Changes
On 15 July 2021, Statistics Indonesia released a report that in March 2021, 10.14% or 27.54 million of the Indonesian population were categorized as poor. The poverty rate in March 2021 is slightly lower than that in September 2020 but still higher than the level of poverty before the pandemic in September 2019 (Figure 1).

Jika dilihat berdasarkan jumlah orang miskin, sejak September 2019 (kemiskinan terendah yang pernah dicapai Indonesia), jumlah orang miskin meningkat sebesar 1,12 juta individu dengan peningkatan terbesar terjadi di wilayah perkotaan sebesar 1 juta dan perdesaan sebesar 120 ribu orang (Gambar 2).
Since September 2019 (when the lowest poverty rate in Indonesia was at its lowesthas ever witnessed), their number of poor people has increased by 1.12 million individuals, with the greatest increase occurring in urban areas by 1 million individuals and rural areas by 120 thousand people individuals (Figure 2).
The decline in the level of household welfare (based on the per-capita expenditure) is due to, among other things, a decrease in household income. SMERU’s study[1] shows that the income of 75% of households decreased during the pandemic. As many as 66% of households owning small enterprises have also experienced a decrease in the number of buyers and rate of business turnover. Also, in August 2020, the unemployment rate increased by 2.7 million people. At the same time, the average wage for workers or laborers decreased by -5.2% from the average wage before the pandemic.
Welfare Rate Drops during the Pandemic
A household’s welfare can be measured, among other things, by its per-capita expenditure. This expenditure provides a clue on the household’s actual purchasing power or its ability to meet the cost of daily needs. Figure 3 shows the changes in household expenditure level (in %) for a period before the pandemic (September 2019) through to during the pandemic (September 2020). In Figure 3, households are ordered using 100 percentiles, where percentile 1 means the poorest and percentile 100 means the richest.
At the national level, it can be seen that the average expenditure of all households drops by -2.3% or at a median expenditure decrease of -3.1%. However, not every household experiences a decrease to the same extent. The expenditure of households within the 41th–95th percentiles on average decreases by -4%. For households within the 40th percentile and lower, the expenditure declines by -0.4%, whilst those within the 5th percentile and below experience a significant decrease of -1% to -1.6%. Meanwhile, during this period households in the 95th percentile and higher experience an increase in welfare levels of  2% to 5%.
When segregated by region, the trend seen in Figure 3 occurs in both urban and rural areas. However, the decline in household expenditure in urban areas is relatively higher than that in rural areas. This is because urban households are relatively more affected by the pandemic than households in rural areas.
Who Falls into Poverty, Who Rises to Higher Class?
To see which households fall below the poverty line, a set of data with two points of time for each household is needed. The households and individuals participating in the September 2020 Susenas and March 2020 Susenas are the same. Therefore, this data is representative of the changes in rank of an individual or household based on their welfare class. Welfare classes are divided into five groups, namely the poor, vulnerable, aspiring middle, middle, and upper classes (World Bank, 2019). Figure 4 shows the dynamic nature of changes in the welfare classes from March to September 2020 based on the number of individuals.
From Figure 4, it can be noted that the number of poor individuals increases from March to September 2020. Half of the individuals living in poor households in September 2020 are those who were below the poverty line in March 2020, whereas the remaining half were from vulnerable households in March 2020. The positive news is that 40% of individuals classified as poor in March 2020 successfully came out of poverty by September 2020, yet they only reached the status of vulnerable class. Half of those in the vulnerable class in March 2020 remained vulnerable in September 2020 and a quarter of them successfully climbed to the rank of aspiring middle class.
The middle class has its own dynamic. As many as 16% of the aspiring middle class in March 2020 were downgraded to the vulnerable class in September 2020, whilst 9% rose to the middle class in the same period. Meanwhile, 40% of the middle class fell into the aspiring middle class and only 1% of them climbed to the upper class, with the majority remaining in the middle class in September 2020. One-third of the upper class remained in the same class and two-third of them switch places with those from the middle class.
Coping Mechanisms Applied by Households during the Crisis
As indicated earlier, it is evident that the welfare level of most households in Indonesia declined during the crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. To make ends meet during the pandemic, households employ a number of strategies. Figure 5 specifies some of the coping mechanisms generally applied to deal with the decline in household welfare. Methods most commonly used by households to make ends meet include selling or pawning assets, reducing nonfood expenditure, borrowing money from relatives, and spending less  on food items. Only 15% of households report that their daily needs are met.
Figure 1. Several coping mechanisms applied since April 2020 for managing needs during the crisis. Source: The 2020 Household Survey.
Many factors influence a household’s ability to deal with the crisis. One of these factors are whether or not they have savings (money that can be easily disbursed) or assets (goods that are easy to sell or pawn). Figure 6 shows the proportion of savings and asset ownership nationally. Up to 51% of households in Indonesia have neither savings nor assets. Meanwhile, 14% of households have savings to fulfill their needs for more than 6 months, 10% have savings for less than 1 month, and the rest have savings for 1–6 months.
Figure 6. Savings or asset ownership. Source: The 2020 Household Survey.
Social Assistance to Reduce Expenditure Burden
In addition to households relying on their own methods of coping, government assistance has been made available. In 2020 the government implemented a number of social protection programs in the form of both subsidy and cash, or social assistance, as a part of the National Economic Recovery Program (PEN). Results of the 2020 Household Survey show that 85% of households received at least one assistance program from the government. Meanwhile, 95% of households in the 20th percentile and below received assistance.[1]
Four major programs in the form of cash assistance, namely PKH, BPNT, BLT DD, and BST, are used in calculations when measuring the value of the assistance programs in terms of adequacy. These four programs cover at least 35 million or 50% of households.
Figure 7 shows the coverage of social assistance programs from the  September 2020 Susenas data. As many as 69% of the poorest households in urban areas and 76% of the poorest households in rural areas receive at least one social assistance program. The proportion of poorer households as assistance beneficiaries is higher than that of richer households. This is because the social assistance programs target poor households.
Meanwhile, Figure 8 shows the average adequacy of social assistance value relative to household expenditure based on the level of household expenditure decile in March 2020. If the four major cash social assistance programs are combined, the social assistance value is worth 21% of the poorest rural household’s total expenditure and 18% of the poorest urban household’s total expenditure. The richer the household, the relatively lesser the benefit proportion of the social assistance they receive. This indicates that the benefit of social assistance for poor households is relatively greater.
In addition, from the 2020 Household Survey, 67% of the assistance beneficiary households subjectively stated that the assistance they receive is highly beneficial. Among the beneficiaries of a combination of three or four programs, 80% to 86% of them reported the assistance they receive to be highly beneficial.
Challenge of Recovery
From the latest (status) reports (per 15 July 2021), conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia show no evident signs of improvement. In response to the worsening situation, the Bank of Indonesia has even gone as far as to adjust its 2021 economic growth projection for the country from 4%–5% to 3.8%. One of the main steps the government has to take to control the pandemic is to accelerate the vaccination program at the national level. Also, social assistance is still desperately needed by the people to reduce household burden, particularly for poor households, in the midst of the current crisis.
Simply put, three steps can be taken by the government to improve the effectiveness of social assistance.
Firstly, the government can increase the assistance value. For example, the assistance amount could be increased from a monthly average of Rp300,000 per household in 2020 to Rp600,000 a month per household in 2021. In 2020, the average cash social assistance for the April–June period was actually Rp600,000 a month per household, but in the July–December period, the value was decreased to Rp300,000 monthly per household. This amount is inadequate considering that household burden has become even greater during this prolonged crisis. For comparison and consideration, the average national poverty line is Rp2,216,714 per month per household. To increase the value of assistance given, one program could be complemented or combined with other programs to improve the overall impact on household’s expenditure.
Secondly, the government can expand the coverage of existing social protection programs, particularly to include current poor and vulnerable households not yet covered by any program. Figure 7 shows that around 25%–30% of the 10% poorest households did not receive any social assistance program. The number of households currently not included in any program is also relatively large for the 40% poorest households. For this purpose, it is crucial to improve the database on poor and vulnerable households as well as those affected by the pandemic since a good database determines whether a program correctly targets its beneficiaries and is successful or not.
Finally, the government should ensure that social assistance benefits are distributed in a timely manner, particularly before the impact of the crisis is too great on households. Accurate targeting and timeliness are key to ensuring that these social assistance programs are effective in helping households deal with the decline in their welfare.
[1]UNICEF, UNDP, Prospera, and SMERU (2021) ‘Analysis of the Social and Economic Impacts of COVID-19 on Households and Strategic Policy Recommendations for Indonesia.’ Research Report. Jakarta: The SMERU Research Institute.
[2]UNICEF, UNDP, Prospera, and SMERU (2021) ‘Analysis of the Social and Economic Impacts of COVID-19 on Households and Strategic Policy Recommendations for Indonesia.’ Research Report. Jakarta: The SMERU Research Institute. The assistance programs included are Family of Hope Program (PKH), Food Staple Assistance/Non-Cash Food Assistance (BPNT), Direct Cash Transfer-Village Fund (BLT DD), Cash Social Assistance (BST), electricity subsidy, subsidy for workers paid under 5 million rupiah monthly, tax subsidy, internet package assistance, and instalment deferment.
COVID-19
Author(s)
Ridho Al Izzati
Researcher
Disclaimer:
SMERU's blog posts reflect the views of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the organization or its funders.
Indonesia’s Economic Growth to Strengthen in 2022, 2023 — ADB
News Release | 6 April 2022
Read time: 2 mins
SHARE THIS PAGE
JAKARTA, INDONESIA (6 April 2022) — Indonesia’s economy is expected to grow by 5.0% in 2022 and 5.2% in 2023 as domestic demand continues to recover, according to a report by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) released today.

“The Indonesian economy briskly rebounded from the downturn in the third quarter and ended 2021 with output higher than in pre-pandemic 2019. Growth was broad-based and should strengthen in 2022 as economic activity continues to normalize,” said ADB Country Director for Indonesia Jiro Tominaga. “Private consumption and investment entered 2022 with a strong momentum, and the third COVID-19 wave should have minimal impact on growth. The Russian invasion of Ukraine, however, if prolonged, could significantly affect inflation and the fiscal balance.”

The Asian Development Outlook (ADO) 2022 says Indonesia’s consumer spending and manufacturing activity have been consistently rising due to the pickup in incomes, jobs, and confidence. Investment is benefiting from expanding demand, improvements in the investment and business climate, and a recovery in credit.

Inflation, which averaged 1.6% last year, is forecast to rise to 3.6% in 2022, due to faster economic growth and higher commodity prices, but it will still be within the Bank of Indonesia’s target range. Inflation should ease to 3.0% in 2022 as commodity price increase abate. Higher prices for Indonesia’s commodity exports, however, should offset lower export volumes, keep a balanced current account and produce some revenue gains.

For the medium term, the report recommends that Indonesia harness digitalization to raise productivity and growth, which will help the country achieve its goal to raise its per-capita gross domestic product to the high-income level by 2045. Firms will need help to step up technology transfer, boost innovation research and development, and access a tech-savvy workforce. Key policy recommendations include public investment in digital infrastructure, fiscal incentives, and regulatory reforms.

ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific, while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 68 members—49 from the region.

Media Contact
dela Cruz, Ramoncito
Communications Specialist
+63 2 8632 5881
+63 999 999 5881
E-mail contact form
Indrananto, Cahyadi
Senior Communications Officer, Indonesia Resident Mission
+62 21 2992 7388
E-mail contact form
SHARE THIS PAGE
Countries
Indonesia
Subjects
Economics
Related
News: Developing Asia Economies Set to Grow 5.2% this Year Amid Global Uncertainty
News: Tax Reform Key to Sustainable Growth in Asia and the Pacific
Economic Forecasts: April 2022
Asian Development Outlook (ADO) 2022
More on ADB's Work in Indonesia
Latest News
[Image: ADB Approves Project Financing for South Commuter Railway Project in the Philippines]

News Release | 9 June 2022
ADB Approves Project Financing for South Commuter Railway Project in the Philippines
The South Commuter Railway will offer commuters fast public transport, help to ease road traffic congestion, and contribute to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in line with the Philippines’ climate change agenda.

[Image: ADB Approves $250 Million for Bangladesh Social Resilience Program ]

News Release | 9 June 2022
ADB Approves $250 Million for Bangladesh Social Resilience Program
ADB has approved a $250 million policy-based loan to support social protection reforms in Bangladesh designed to protect vulnerable population against socioeconomic challenges.

[Image: ADB’s Transport Investments in Pacific Forecast at Over $1.6 Billion in 2022–2024]

News from Country Offices | 9 June 2022
ADB’s Transport Investments in Pacific Forecast at Over $1.6 Billion in 2022–2024
ADB's transport investments in the Pacific are expected to reach over $1.6 billion, including $115 million in cofinancing, for 22 projects during the 2022–2024 period, says the latest issue of the Pacific Transport Update.

[Image: ADB Vice-President Meets with Tajikistan President, Reaffirms Support ]

News from Country Offices | 7 June 2022
ADB Vice-President Meets with Tajikistan President, Reaffirms Support
ADB Vice-President Shixin Chen reaffirmed ADB’s support for Tajikistan’s development priorities and discussed ways of further strengthening the almost 25-year partnership with the country.
The Interpreter
Articles
Debates
Contributors
About
Published daily by the Lowy Institute

Published daily by the Lowy Institute

Indonesia: The not so good news
Tim Lindsey Tim Mann
Indonesia is becoming a wealthy nation, but still has an enormous number of very poor people, who are not doing well.

[Image: In comparative international student assessments, Indonesia ranked well below Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, and Thailand (Photo: Andrew Gal via Getty Images)]

In comparative international student assessments, Indonesia ranked well below Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, and Thailand (Photo: Andrew Gal via Getty Images)
Published 3 Feb 2020 15:00   1 Comments  
Aid & Development
Indonesia
Indonesia’s booming economy has been growing between 5% and 6% for years and its GDP (PPP) is well ahead of Australia’s. A G20 member, it is proud of its new status as an emerging middle-class country, with PricewaterhouseCoopers predicting it will be among the world’s top five economies by 2050.

This is why Indonesia now likes to see itself as an emerging aid donor rather than a recipient. And it is a big part of why Australia’s aid program in the country – once Australia’s biggest – has been slashed to the bone over the last decade. This was a mistake. The good news about Indonesia’s economic success masks the real situation: Indonesia is becoming a wealthy country, but it still has an enormous number of very poor people, and they are not doing well.

Most expert observers of Indonesia – and many Indonesians – agree that it has been in democratic regression over the last decade, accelerating in the last five years.

About 20% of Indonesia’s population of 270 million – 50 million people – remains vulnerable to falling into poverty, with income just above the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day. And it gets worse outside the islands of Java and Sumatra, which contribute about 80% of GDP. Poverty rates are seven times higher in Papua than Jakarta, the capital.

The reason is simple – Indonesia’s new wealth isn’t trickling down fast enough. The four richest billionaires in Indonesia have more wealth ($25 billion) than the poorest 40% of Indonesians ($24 billion), that is, 100 million people. The income share held by lowest 20% is only 6.8%, with gross national income per capita just US$3,840, lower than Samoa, Tonga, Fiji, and neighbours Malaysia and Thailand.

The Indonesian government’s capacity to fix this severe inequality is limited by tax revenues of just 9.9 % of GDP, the lowest in Southeast Asia apart from Myanmar, and lower than the average for least developed countries.

As a result of historically limited government investment in the health system and marked regional disparities, Indonesian health outcomes are way below those of a middle-class country.

For example, the maternal mortality ratio (per 100,000 live births) was a huge 177 in 2017. By contrast, the average across the Organisation for Economic Coperation and Development was 14. Even Indonesia’s poorer neighbour Timor-Leste ranked better with 142. The infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) was 21, higher than Pacific countries including the Solomon Islands (17), Samoa (14) and Tonga (13), and far beyond neighbours Thailand (8) and Malaysia (7).

Stunting is another serious problem, affecting 36.4% of Indonesian children under 5 in 2013. This is on par with sub-Saharan countries such as Malawi, Angola, and Sierra Leone, and Indonesia’s large population means it ranks fifth in the world for the number of stunted children.

Adults face major health issues too. Some 68.1% of adult Indonesian men smoke, the second highest rate in the world after Timor-Leste. Unsurprisingly, Indonesia’s five leading causes of death are all tobacco-related, including ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, tuberculosis, diabetes, and chronic respiratory diseases.

Indonesia’s education system is struggling as well. Despite big improvements in access, quality remains very poor. The widely cited Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) scores in 2018 fell in all categories since the last test in 2015. Of 79 countries, Indonesia ranked just 73 in mathematics, 74 in reading, and 71 in science, well below Singapore, Malaysia, Brunei, and Thailand.

The scores from the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) offers another measure that is equally concerning. A typical Jakarta adult (aged 25–65) with tertiary education has lower literacy proficiency than the typical OECD adult aged 16–24 with no more than lower secondary-school education. Some 32% of Jakartans are below level 1 (the lowest level) in literacy, compared to only 4.5% of OECD adults.

The Defence and Foreign Minister’s 2 +2 meeting, December (Photo: Australian Embassy Jakarta/Flickr)
Why is this happening in a country boasting economic success? A big part of the problem is poor governance and its partner, corruption. Most expert observers of Indonesia – and many Indonesians – agree that it has been in democratic regression over the last decade, accelerating in the last five years.

Freedom House, for example, ranked Indonesia as “free” from 2006–2013, yet now it rates it only “partly free”. The Economist Intelligence Unit likewise sees Indonesia as “flawed democracy”, ranking 64 of 167 countries, lower than neighbours Malaysia and the Philippines.  Reporters Without Borders (RSF) saw press freedom – key to any successful democracy – as problematic too, ranking Indonesia at just 124 of 180 countries in 2019.

Indonesia’s entrenched corruption has long been a politically-volatile popular grievance but changes backed by the political elite soon after last year’s elections gutted the courageous anti-corruption commission (the KPK). Corruption investigations are already faltering. In 2019, Indonesia scored 40 on Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index (where 100 is “most clean”), making it 85th of 180 countries, and it is now likely to see its ranking slide.

In short, poor governance linked to corruption and democratic regression in Indonesia is severely hampering outcomes for the poor in health and education, and maintaining deep inequality. Australia’s new free trade agreement with Indonesia flags a desire to access some of the fast-growing wealth of its tiny elite. But what about the other Indonesians? The 2018 Human Development Index (based on life expectancy at birth, expected years of schooling, mean years of schooling, and GNI per capita) placed Indonesia at 111 of 189 countries and territories, a rank it shares with Samoa.

But unlike Samoa, Indonesia is a gigantic nation of 270 million people located directly to Australia’s north. Increased aid won’t buy leverage in Indonesia, but it can win access, and sometimes influence, in a country that is vital to Canberra’s strategic planning, and will only become more important as China reaches into Southeast Asia.

More importantly, reviving Australian aid for health, education, and governance can help some of the 72 million poor or near poor Indonesians – particularly woman and girls – struggling to stay healthy and get educated on just a little over $2 a day.

Related Content
Economic diplomacy: Little Australia spends slowly in the Pacific
Show 1 Comments
Previous Article
Competitive coexistence: A new blueprint for Russia-West relations
Next Article
Solastalgia: A malady for our age?
You may also be interested in
Joost Hiltermann 26 Feb 2018 14:20
Russia a reluctant driver in the Syrian war
Moscow is averse or incapable of assuming the mantle of ultimate arbiter in Syria.
Daniel Flitton 9 Feb 2021 14:00
Does it really matter if the Pacific Islands Forum falls apart?
Last week’s fiasco over electing a new leader revealed an organisation too fragile to confront big challenges.
Rodger Shanahan 20 Feb 2017 13:03
Infighting in the Syrian civil war
US-led coalition strikes on al-Qaeda affiliated groups seem to have increased since the latest in-fighting occurred.
Stay informed with the latest commentary and analysis on international events from experts at the Lowy Institute and around the world.

Register
Nani Zulminarni
Center for Women's Resources Development
The Wachid’s government failed to keep its promise of economic recovery. There was no improvement in living standard of approximately 40% of the population who were living below the poverty line. Many serious social problems remain unsolved, including political instability, unrest and armed conflict, human rights violations, corruption, nepotism, collusion, scandal, and poverty. Critical awareness of people and the availability of space for people to express their ideas are promising for the new Indonesia.
Data on 2001 is lacking, but data used to write last year’s Social Watch report is still valid because there have been no significant and dramatic changes in social conditions in Indonesia. This report focuses on the burning issues of refuges and violence against women, as well as decentralisation policy and women in decision-making. Information used to prepare this report was gathered from different sources, including the daily newspapers, NGOs, and the author’s first-hand experience working at the grassroots level throughout the country.

Economic problems and a presidential impeachment

The year 2001 was a critical time for Indonesia. It was a time when people lost patience with living in poverty. The government under Wachid’s leadership failed to keep its promise of economic recovery. Inflation reached 12.55%, much higher than the previous year when it was 9.35%. Income from the export of goods and fromtourism declined.[1] Consequently, there was no improvement in living standard of the approximately 40% of the population who were living below the poverty line.

The political system has remained unstable. Politicians have shown their political immaturity by quarreling among themselves. As the result, they paid more attention to political interests than to socio-economic recovery. Many serious social problems remain unsolved, including unrest and conflict in some areas of Indonesia, human rights violations, corruption, nepotism, collusion, scandal, and poverty. This situation has brought sadness and frustration to the people of Indonesia.

The peak of confusion came when parliament impeached the president in July 2001 and replaced him with Megawati as the fifth Indonesian president. Since she is the first woman president of Indonesia, people have high expectations, especially with regard to economic recovery and conflict resolution. It will not be easy for the new president, however, since she faces a complicated situation and many problems. She has now been president for one-half year, and there is no significant improvement in socio-economic and political conditions.

Still struggling for basic needs[2]

The population has reached 195.1 million (excluding two provinces—Aceh and Maluku), with 57.69% living in rural areas. More than half are women. Statistics show that over 65% of the population is in the productively active age category of 15-64 years. More than 49% of the population spends on average less than IDR 200,000 or approx. USD 20 per month on basic necessities, indicating that the number of people living below the poverty line is still high.

Education remains a serious problem: 10.25% of the population is illiterate and only about 1.29% attends university. In general, the number of women who are illiterate with only a low level of education is twice that of men. Many children drop out of school at a very early age both in rural and urban areas. Some become street children and perform child labour for family survival. Although there is no official data released regarding street children and child labour, NGO activists working on child issues say there are currently more street children and more child labourers.

Unresolved conflicts and refugee problems

A major concern in Indonesia is unresolved conflict and its impacts, in particular the increasing number of people living in refugee camps. Conflicts occurring in several regions have complex causes, including history, wrong development policy, oppressive previous governmental systems, and access to natural resources. Unfair distribution of wealth by the centralised government in the New Order era created huge gaps among regions in terms of welfare, development and accessibility.

During 2001, about 1.3 million people—over half of them women and children—lived in inadequate refugee camps spread across 19 provinces in Indonesia.[3] They are victims of several conflict areas including West and Central Kalimantan, Central Sulawesi, Aceh, Maluku and others. At this time, there appears no way to solve the refugee problem. The government has allocated special funds for refugees and tries to re-locate them, but problems are too complex. Many refugees have been living in camps for over two years—eg, in West Kalimantan—without certainty.

The number of refugees may increase, not only because of the endless conflict, but also because of natural disasters such as floods and typhoons. This will increase the government’s homework and its burden.

Violence against women

As a domino effect of social economic problems, violence against women increased dramatically in 2001. The National Commission for Women recorded at least 3,169 cases handled in 14 areas of Indonesia. The commission believes the actual number may be ten times higher since people tend to cover up domestic violence. Approximately 40% of women experiences violence perpetrated by a close relative such as a husband or by a neighbour, and 32% gets raped in their own neighbourhood. The violence happens in conflict areas, in big cities, and in poor areas where many people live below the poverty line. Women, especially those who are migrant workers, also experience violence in their work places (17%).

Trafficking in women, especially girl children, is increasing. Poverty leads people to sell their girl children to sex and entertainment industries in Indonesia but also abroad. The National Commission for Women has not been able to put an official number on this clandestine trade, but many cases were recorded by NGOs in their working areas.

Decentralisation and the struggle for women’s rights

To solve some of the problems related to conflict and poverty, the government has begun a process of decentralisation. This process is supposed to give each region greater power and autonomy to manage and control their own area and resources. It is also meant to give people more power to control their own government. The road is still long, however, since not every region is ready for self-government. In addition, decentralisation is interpreted and translated differently from one region to another.

The decentralisation law suggests that each region explore its own traditional and customary laws and use them as the basis for local regulation and law.  In some cases, the implementation of customary law may benefit people, but, in many cases, it will put women at a disadvantage, since most customary law is rooted in strong patriarchal values. Women will be marginalised and excluded from decision-making processes in many areas.

Women will be pushed backwards when their position and status is determined by obviously discriminatory systems. One example is in West Sumatra, where a customary law has been adopted determining that village decision-makers will consist of three parties—religious leaders, intellectuals and government officials, all of whom are understood to be men.

A woman president and women decision-makers

Although Indonesia now has a woman president, there are no strong women politicians to support the women’s movement at national and regional levels. There are few women in decision-making positions compared with men. For example, women make up only 8.9% of parliament, there is no single woman among 32 heads of province, only five women among 266 district heads, and women hold less than 10% of high-level positions in the government structure.

This shortage of women decision-makers is responsible for gender-blind policy and development concepts and strategies. Political education for women is done only by a few NGOs. Indonesia will soon be conducting an election. An effective strategy for political education and leadership training for women will be critical in preparation for that moment.

Conclusion

Although Indonesia has a long way to go on its road to renewal, there is hope to keep Indonesia moving. Critical awareness of people and the availability of space for people to express their ideas are promising for the new Indonesia. The next election will be very important and challenging for Indonesia. Effective economic strategy is required to cure Indonesia and prevent its fall into bankruptcy. This will require collaboration of all parties including civil society, government and private sector. The people of Indonesia have high expectations that their politicians will have the political will to put public concerns above their own private interests.

Notes:
[1] Kompas Daily Newspaper, January 2002.

[2] Data from Welfare Statistics 2000 by the National Social Economic Survey of BPS.

[3] Kompas Daily Newspaper, December 2001.

Nani Zulminarni is the Chairperson of The Center for Women's Resources Development (PPSW).