What are you looking for?
Home / Why Singapore? / The Singapore economy: A brief introduction
Back to Incorporation guides
Looking to incorporate a company in Singapore
Our experts at Hawksford can help

contact us
Subscribe to free incorporation insights
Considering moving or expanding your business to Singapore? Sign up to receive useful guides to help you make the right choices for you and your business.

Subscribe Now
What makes the Singapore economy tick?
The robust Singapore economy drives thousands of global professionals to its shores each year – but what makes it so attractive? Read on to find out.
A major financial hub in the Asia Pacific region, Singapore has long earned a reputation as one of the world’s most advanced economies.

In 2017, Singapore was ranked as the world’s second most open economy by the Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom, as well as the world’s second most pro-business regime by the World Bank’s Doing Business report.

Despite its small domestic market and a lack of natural resources, Singapore successfully weathered through the financial crises of 1997 and 2008. Today, the Singapore economy is one of the most stable in the world, with no foreign debt, high government revenue and a consistently positive surplus.

The Singapore economy is mainly driven by exports in electronics manufacturing and machinery, financial services, tourism, and the world’s busiest cargo seaport.
Which Singapore industries drive the economy? Singapore’s largest industry by far is the manufacturing sector, which contributes 20%-25% of the country’s annual GDP.

Key industry clusters in Singapore’s manufacturing include electronics, chemicals, biomedical sciences, logistics and transport engineering. In the third quarter of 2017, the manufacturing sector grew by 35%, with clusters like electronics and precision engineering benefiting from high demand.

Close behind Singapore’s manufacturing industry is its financial services industry, which has enjoyed stable growth due to Singapore’s pro-business environment and political stability. Home to over 200 banks and a regional hub of choice for many global financial services firms, Singapore’s financial services marketplace facilitates the transfer of knowledge, processes, technology and skills between global, regional and domestic markets.

Other emerging industries that are making significant contributions to Singapore’s economy include medical technology, aerospace engineering, clean energy, healthcare, and content development.

Below is a list of Singapore’s top industries according to their GDP contribution:


[Image: Top contributing industry Singapore]


Source: Department of Statistics Singapore
What natural resources does Singapore have?
Located at the southernmost tip of the Malaysian peninsula and with a land area smaller than that of New York’s, Singapore has no significant natural resources.

However, this did not stop Singapore from developing itself into a regional hub for oil and gas, as well as a world leader in sustainable water solutions and projects such as NEWater and the Deep Tunnel Sewerage System.

It has been said that Singapore’s true natural resource is its people – and in a growing economy, this could not be more apt. As the economy grows, both local and non-local companies have access to a pool of an educated workforce and, eventually, a burgeoning consumer market.

How developed is Singapore’s infrastructure ?
As a commercial and military seaport during the British colonial era, Singapore’s infrastructure has always been well-developed. After Singapore gained independence in 1965, the post-colonial government went on to improve and expand the country’s transport, communications, industrial, and housing systems.

By land, Singapore is served by 9,310 kilometres of paved roads, 199.6 kilometres of rail (mass rapid transit and light rail combined), as well as island-wide bus, taxi, and ride-share operations.  The transport system is efficient, safe, and punctual.

By air, Changi International Airport is connected to 380 cities in 90 countries. It handles more than 7,000 weekly flights transporting passengers and cargo worldwide. By sea, the Singapore port gives shippers a choice of over 200 shipping lines and access to some 600 ports in 123 countries. At any one time, there can be as many as 1,000 ships docked at the Singapore port, which makes it the busiest container port in the world.

The telecommunications system is no less remarkable - Singapore has one of the world’s highest mobile penetration rates at 1.5 mobile phones per person, and more than 90% of Singaporean households have Internet access. In hotspots such as coffee chains, fast-food restaurants, or Changi Airport, you can use an island-wide Wi-Fi service called [email protected] for free.

Industrial and commercial facilities for businesses are also readily available in Singapore. The Jurong Town Corporation (JTC) has over 47.7 million square meters of strategically-located built industrial space that can be used to build factories, warehouses and business parks. For commercial businesses, choice of world-class high-rise and low-rise offices in the Central Business District and other parts of town are available.

What is Singapore’s current Gross Domestic Product (GDP)?
For the third quarter of 2017, Singapore’s GDP (at current market prices) stands at S$107 billion. The Singapore economy grew by 5.2% during this period – which is the fastest pace it has grown in more than three years, according to a Bloomberg report.

The recovery of global trade and an improving labour market has helped Singapore not only sustain growth in the manufacturing industry, but also broaden out to other industries such as services and retail.

The Monetary Authority of Singapore estimates that the Singapore economy is likely to expand at a steady, but slightly slower, pace in 2018 compared to 2017.

Does the Singapore government have any public debt?
The Singapore government has maintained zero foreign debt since 1995. As for domestic debt, the total outstanding government borrowing was S$496 billion as of the third quarter of 2017, which comprises of registered stocks and bonds, treasury bills and advance deposits.

However, this high figure is not an accurate representation of Singapore’s fiscal strength - the Singapore government borrows to invest, and the return on investment (ROI) generated on these investments makes up for the difference.

By implementing these strategic debts alongside with strong asset protection, robust economic growth, and prudent macroeconomic policies, the Singapore government has a strong balance sheet with its assets outweighing its liabilities.

What are the main sources of revenue for the Singapore government?
The Singapore government’s total revenue is estimated at S$69 billion as of the third quarter of 2017.

As with most governments, Singapore earns the bulk of its revenue from taxes – income, property, excise and customs duties, as well as GST. Other revenue sources for the government include are licence and permit fees, government property rental, fines and forfeitures, as well as capital receipts from the sale of capital goods.

What is Singapore’s current currency strength?
As of November 2017, the Singapore dollar traded at S$1.3467 against the U.S dollar, which is slightly lower than the 2016 average rate of S$1.3815.

Here’s how the Singapore dollar has fared against major global and regional currencies (figures in SGD):

[Image: Singapore's currency against global and regional currencies]

What is Singapore’s current trade strength?
Singapore traded S$967.1 billion worth of goods in 2017, an increase of 11.1% from the previous year. Singapore is considered to be the world’s 14th largest exporter and 17th largest importer.

Singapore's top three export and import commodities sections are machinery and transport equipment, chemicals and chemical products and miscellaneous manufactured articles.

Singapore exported $$515 billion worth of goods in 2017, with its primary export partners being the United States, Australia, Japan, China and United Kingdom

It also imported S$452.1 billion worth of goods in 2017, with its primary import partners being the United States, Netherlands, China, Hong Kong and Japan.

Build your career in a secure, stable economy
The Singapore economy is on a healthy growth path – it was ranked the third wealthiest nation in the world by Fortune, and has enjoyed high rates of foreign direct investments (S$62 billion in 2017). If you’re looking for a place to set up or expand your business, Singapore is the place to be.

Company Registration

Hawksford is a leading provider of company formation and administration services for companies of all sizes in Singapore. To support businesses in Singapore, we offer customized company formation solutions designed exclusively to meet the needs of Foreign Entrepreneurs, Foreign Companies and Singapore Residents.

What makes Hawksford a trusted provider?
10+ Years experience in Singapore
Unrivalled cloud technology and infrastructure
1000+ businesses successfully incorporated in Singapore
100% Singapore based specialists
More questions? Let us guide you further
You may find these Singapore business guides useful in helping you make your decision:

GUIDE

Singapore industry guides
Providing you with expert guidance & resources for starting & operating a Singapore firm in specific industries. Find out your industry information here.

GUIDE

Why Foreign Companies Relocate to Singapore
Attractive Tax Regime, Extensive Tax Treaties, Gateway to Asia & Smart Immigration Policies. Just some reasons why people relocate to Singapore. Learn more.

GUIDE

Singapore Company Registration
Registering a Singapore company? Here’s the only company registration guide you’ll ever need.

GUIDE

Why choose Singapore for your business?
One major advantage of relocating your business to Singapore is its convenient location. Find out more.

Looking to register a company in Singapore?
Choose your preferred contact method and one of our dedicated Singapore experts will be in touch
Schedule a call Start an email conversation
Our services get you one step ahead in Singapore.
Just a few contact details so we know who to ask for.  We try to call back within 48 hours of receiving your information.

Start an email conversation with our experts
Our experts will be in touch with you within the next 48 hours.

Back to top

Find us at:
16 Raffles Quay,
#32-03 Hong Leong Building,
Singapore, 048581
About us:
About us
Sign up for news
Rate this website
Contact Hawksford
Accessibility help
Privacy & Cookies
Terms of use
What are you looking for?
Home / Living & Working in Singapore / Quality of Life in Singapore
Back to Immigration guides
Need help applying for Singapore visa(s)
Hawksford has helped thousands of entrepreneurs and foreign companies and their employees to establish their roots in Singapore

Speak to our experts today
Sign up to receive the latest Singapore business updates
Our email newsletters bring you the latest news, trends and developments in Singapore from our team of experts; ensuring that you have all the information that you need at your fingertips to set up and succeed in Singapore.

Subscribe
Quality of Life in Singapore
Quality of life is often used as a shorthand for measuring how good one feels about one’s life. There are formal procedures for calculating this measure that includes factors such as economic, social, physical, political and spiritual well-being. Singapore may be the smallest country in Southeast Asia but it has emerged as one of the best places to live in Asia with a very high quality of life measurement.

Singapore has been ranked as the top city in Asia in terms of quality of living according to global human resource consultancy, Mercer. Singapore is also regarded as the ‘Happiest country in South-east Asia’ according to the 2018 World Happiness Report . The study also showed that in Singapore, family is the most important unit and despite materialistic goals, the family and community always takes precedence. This is turn helps build a content and happy society. Factors that impact quality of life:
The following factors play a key role in determining the quality of life in a given country:

Political and social environment
Economic environment
Socio-cultural environment
Health and sanitation
Schools and education
Public services and transportation
Recreation
Natural environment
Consumer goods
Housing
Political & Social Environment
Singapore is known for its stable political climate. Despite being considered centralised and authoritarian, the political culture is pragmatic, rational and based on the rule of law. The highest goal of the government is the survival and prosperity of this small nation. This often means, having to make unpopular but hard and wise decisions in the interest of the nation. The government believes in being pro-active and thinking for the future.

According to Singapore’s founding father Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore has been able to attract some 9000 multi-national companies, because it offers First World conditions in a Third World region. Good governance is having a good system that will ensure the country survives, so that citizens have secure lives.

Economic Environment
Singapore boasts a competitive, corruption-free, open business environment. The Port of Singapore is one of the busiest in the world as the country focuses on electronics and chemical exports to richer industrialised nations. However, over the years, Singapore has diversified its economy and today it has become a research and development (R&D) hub, bio-medical hub, banking and finance centre and in recent times the health-care destination of Asia. Today, Singapore is a knowledge-based economy and attracts multinational investments. Its open trade policies, social stability, world-class infrastructure and international communication links, are some of the reasons why foreign investors flock its shores. This is despite the fact that land and labour costs have risen sharply and employers have to pay a sizable portion of their employees’ salary to their Central Provident Fund.

The World Economic Forum positions Singapore’s economy as one of the most open in the world. The country is also known for its low tax regime. In Singapore, personal income tax rates start from 0% and capped at 22% for residents while non-residents are taxed between 15% and 22%. The corporate income tax rate in Singapore is approximately 8.5% for profits up to S$300,000 and a flat 17% above S$300,000. The GST or VAT rate is at 7%. Furthermore, there is no dividend tax, no estate duty, and no capital gains tax.

Related link: Economy in Singapore

According to a report by financial advisory firm, Ernst & Young and the Japan External Trade Organisation, Singapore was found to be one of Asia’s best investment destinations for foreign firms. It has benefited from these firms, as they bring in capital, technology, management know-how and access to international export markets. Singapore has also realised the need to enhance its manpower and encourages top foreign talent to re-locate here. Hence the labour force is highly educated, competent and skilled.

Related link: Doing Business in Singapore

Socio-cultural Environment
Singapore’s social and ethnic fabric is a unique blend of cultures and people – Malays, Chinese, Indians and expats from various countries. Singapore’s lifestyle is multi-cultural with each of these ethnic communities maintaining their unique way of life and at the same time living harmoniously. Singapore’s society is cosmopolitan due to the influx of foreigners in recent times. People are amiable and courteous to each other. High emphasis is placed on communal and racial harmony. The Singapore government has laid down five basic ‘Shared Vales’ to develop a distinct Singapore identity – nation before community and society above self; family as the basic unit of society; community support and respect for the individual; consensus not conflict; racial and religious harmony.

Related link: People of Singapore

Singapore has been ranked first in Asia and eighth globally in Mercer’s personal safely ranking. Ensuring security and personal safety for expats and their families has made Singapore a popular destination for international relocation. Expatriates continue to cite safety as one of the most attractive features of living in Singapore.

Healthcare
Singapore’s population enjoys one of the highest levels of health and nutrition in Asia. The country is also renowned for its world-class health infrastructure, technological advancements in the healthcare industry, expert doctors and specialists. The healthcare environment is clean, efficient and safe. Singapore has adopted a public-private partnership in healthcare financing. Central to this system is the ‘Medisave’, where every working resident has to make a mandatory monthly contribution to the Medisave portion of his Central Provident Fund account. This can then be used for payment of medical expenses. The government on its part provides good, affordable health-care and subsidised medical services to the needy, at public hospitals and clinics. Apart from registered pharmacies, pharmaceuticals are easily available in super-markets, shopping centres and departmental stores. Drugs are safe for consumption and have a high standard of quality. All medical practitioners are registered with relevant bodies.

Related link: Healthcare in Singapore

Singapore promotes a clean and green environment. It encourages a healthy lifestyle and diet and cleanliness and hygiene are imbibed in its system. The National Environment Agency conducts regular checks all over the island for instances of mosquito breeding and imposes heavy fines at breeding sites. Steps like these have played a vital role in trying to contain the spread of diseases like chikungunya and dengue. According to the World Health Organization 2010 ranking on the World's 100 Best Health Systems, Singapore was ranked 6th out of 100 countries.

Schools & Education
Singapore places great emphasis on education. The education system arms individuals with the necessary skills and knowledge to survive in a globally competitive environment. Singapore’s public schools have high standards of teaching and learning, with many of its students winning International competitions. Apart from the 3 internationally renowned local Universities – National University of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University and Singapore Management University – Singapore houses several internationally renowned world-class institutions like INSEAD, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business and United World College to name a few. The country has taken cognizance of a growing expat community and set up many International Schools and Foreign System Schools (FSS). These schools are registered with the Ministry of Education and follow a curriculum identical to those in their home country. The fees per year range from S$12,000 to S$48,000.

The National University of Singapore (NUS), Nanyang Technological University (NTU) and Singapore Management University (SMU) are both among the top 50business schools worldwide according to the 2018 Financial Times ‘Top 100 Global MBA’ ranking.
Public Services & Transportation

Singapore is acutely aware of the need to have clean water, clean energy, clean air, managing traffic congestion, water conservation, reliable energy supply and good urban planning. Over the past few years, the government has focused efforts on building Singapore as a ‘Garden City’ (addition of greenery and create a garden effect), with good urban planning and pollution control as key considerations. Today the city is clean and green and relatively free of traffic congestion. Residents have access to well planned parks and nature reserves. The nation’s clean water bodies provide reliable water supply and opportunities for sports and recreation.

According to the National Environment Agency, Singapore enjoys better air quality than many cities in Asia and its Pollutant Standard Index (PSI) has remained in the 'Good' and 'Moderate' range for much of 2017. In recognition of the progress and achievement that Singapore has made in integrated water resources management, the national water agency, Public Utilities Board, was awarded the prestigious Stockholm Industry Water Award in 2007. Singapore also has bans placed on smoking in public places.

Singapore boasts of a highly efficient, hassle-free and affordable public transportation system, which includes taxis, buses and the Mass Rapid Transport (MRT) rail system. These modes of transport are air-conditioned and operate from 5:30 am until 12 mid-night and link the entire city. They are safe, clean and efficient. Bus and rail fares are affordable, costing anything between S$0.70 to S$2.50 per trip. Taxis are plentiful and relatively cheap compared to the Western world. Taxis are reliable and drivers do not fleece customers or demand even a cent more than the metered fare.

In order to curb traffic congestion, the government has introduced a Electronic Road Pricing (ERP) system. This means that you have to pay a minimum fee when you use certain congested roads and expressways in the CBD. Owning a car can be extremely expensive in Singapore, costing anywhere between S$100,000-S$200,000, excluding registration, insurance and tax costs. Leasing a vehicle is a cheaper alternative.

Recreation
Dining and shopping are the two most popular activities in Singapore. Most expatriates feel the lack of adequate recreational options and resort to exploring nearby places in Malaysia (Langkawi, Tioman, Genting etc.) and Indonesia (Bintan, Batam, Bali etc.) over the weekend. Singapore does have a vibrant night life and there are several bars and night clubs that are frequented by patrons. The cinema is another option that rates high on popularity. There are art festivals, plays, music concerts, cultural performances etc., but these options are seasonal and could be expensive.

Natural Environment
Due to Singapore's geographical location, it is generally free from the danger of natural disasters. However, the weather can be humid all year round, and wet towards the last few months of the calendar year.

Access to Consumer Goods
Singapore’s retail sector experiences brisk trading conditions practically all year round. With an increase in disposable income, housing boom and aggressive retail promotion, people spend on luxury items, automotive and household items like furniture and other consumer durables. Hence, every retailer is setting up shop in Singapore. Both fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) such as packaged food, cosmetics, toiletries, household products, etc., and luxury brands are easily available. Many consumer durables have become basic necessities in Singapore.

Hypermarts and supermarkets have several outlets that dot the island. Most of these supermarkets offer promotions and discounts and also stock basic Mexican, Australian and Indian products. This apart, there are convenient stores like 7-Eleven and small local grocery shops near the housing estates. You wold also find specialty supermarkets like Medi-ya (Japanese supermarket), Tanglin Market Place (American products), Tierney’s (Scandinavian, Swiss and German products) and Mustafa (Indian products). Heat-and-serve meals, semi prepared food, frozen food, western-type convenience foods are gaining popularity. Low fat foods, diet beverages, yogurt, fruits and other health foods are also becoming popular. Since Singapore imports every possible item from every corner of the globe, the choice is wide and prices are competitive.

Housing
Housing in Singapore falls under two main categories – public HDB flats (built by the Housing Development Board) and private condominiums/landed property. The choice of housing purely depends on budget, location, facilities/amenities, transportation and personal preferences.

Many expats prefer to live in condominiums and often choose to live near their workplace or their children’s schools. Condominiums are mid to high rise buildings with stylish exteriors and interiors, 24 hours security, swimming pool, gym, tennis courts, BBQ pits and covered car parks. The rental of a three-bedroom condo close to the CBD can cost anywhere between S$7,000 and S$15,000, while rental of units located outside the CBD can cost between S$3,300 to S$5,000. HDB flats, where 90% of Singaporeans live, are a less expensive option. However, they do not come with the luxury amenities like swimming pools or gyms. They are however, often located near shopping malls, food courts/restaurants/hawker centres, a library, supermarkets, clinics and sports/recreational facilities. Expats from India, China and Malaysia often find HDB flats a viable and convenient option.

Related link: Housing in Singapore

In a nutshell Positive Factors
Easyto adjust to the culture and living environment
Modern, westernised environment
Scores high on safety and low crime rates
English is widely used and a first language in Singapore
Convenient transport, high quality infrastructure and health facilities
Readily available and affordable domestic help
Clean, green and healthy environment to live in
Negative Factors
Limited sports/recreation options
Rule-bound and sometimes stifling
Expensive to own a car
Weather can be hot and humid most of the time
Need help applying for Singapore visa(s)
Hawksford has helped thousands of entrepreneurs and foreign companies and their employees to establish their roots in Singapore

Speak to our experts today
More questions? Let us guide you further
You may find these Singapore business guides useful in helping you make your decision:

GUIDE

Singapore Work Culture for Newcomers
If this is your first time working in Singapore, it may be useful for you to know more about the work culture here to help you adjust to it.

GUIDE

Choosing the right international school in Singapore for your child
When faced with a new school system, it is important to make comparisons across several key criteria. Singapore is very fortunate to be home to a wide choice of world class international schools.

GUIDE

Cost of Living in Singapore
Our online guide provides you with guidance on the cost of living in Singapore from Clothing, Food & Transport to Education & Utilities, Find out more here.

Need help with immigration or relocation?
It's easy and quick. Let us help you get established in Singapore.

Contact us
Back to top

Find us at:
16 Raffles Quay,
#32-03 Hong Leong Building,
Singapore, 048581
About us:
About us
Sign up for news
Rate this website
Contact Hawksford
Accessibility help
Privacy & Cookies
Terms of use
Tag Archive for: Poverty In Singapore
Posts
Global Poverty, Politics and Political Attention, SingaporePoverty in Singapore: A New National Priority
[Image: Poverty in Singapore]


Despite the enormous wealth present in Singapore, poverty is also a pressing issue within the nation. With the lack of a minimum wage, there is no guarantee that Singaporean citizens have the opportunity to make enough to live on. Leaders within the country, however, are bringing the issue to the forefront of the national conversation. Poverty in Singapore increased by 43.45% in just three years, from 2012 to 2015. Poverty affects the elderly the most, with their rates increasing 74.32% within the same time period. This rapid increase has spurred government officials to address the issue. Various government policies, such as the lack of a minimum wage and restrictions on the withdrawal of retirement money, often receive critiques as possible causes of the growing problem of poverty in Singapore. PSP Talk
The Progress Singapore Party is a major national political group, that describes itself as the ‘party for the people.’ It supports increased attention toward rising poverty rates. The party’s rhetoric largely focuses on fighting for all Singaporeans, not just elite classes that possess money and power. The party hosted a talk series, PSP Talk, in September 2019 to highlight pressing issues and direct the national conversation. Poverty in Singapore was one of the major topics of discussion during the event. Yeoh Lam Keong, the former chief economist at GIC Private Limited, spoke at the talk series, notably proposing several poverty reforms based on the findings from his research. Keong took the opportunity to emphasize the severity of poverty in Singapore.

“To my shock and horror, I [realized] that the position of the poor in [Singapore] was much worse and much more awful than I [could] imagine,” said Keong about his research.

PSP Talk opened up an opportunity for education and reflection on Singapore’s relationship with poverty and welfare reform. Keong defined three classes of poverty in his presentation– the elderly poor, the working poor and the unemployed poor– to establish an academic understanding of the situation in Singapore. He went on to explain his research-based policy initiatives, which the government could enforce to support its impoverished citizens. Keong’s initiatives included raising funding for the Workfare Income Supplement and Silver Support Scheme, programs that provide funds to those in need, by $500-$600 a month. He argued that this was a fiscally achievable action that would aid the suffering populations of the poor and elderly. Since Keong’s presentation on these policy reforms, the Singaporean government has set up expansions to the Silver Support Scheme. In January 2021, the program will expand its qualifying criteria and increase quarterly payouts by 20%.

Party member Secretary-General Tan Cheng Bok also spoke at the event. Dr. Tan made a public commitment to understanding the complexities of poverty in the nation and working to create solutions. He continued to support this assertion in July 2020 while campaigning for the General Election, pushing voters to elect representatives who ask the “right questions,” and value trust and transparency. After a narrow defeat, Dr. Tan vowed to continue to serve the people on these issues.

Looking Forward
PSP Talk represents a promising step toward addressing the growing rate of poverty in Singapore. The Progress Singapore Party’s decision to highlight poverty at this gathering of academics and national leaders suggests a new focus for Singapore’s government. The party continues to push for increased influence within the government while holding the current elected officials accountable for the needs of all Singaporean citizens.

– Riya Kohli
Photo: Flickr

August 18, 2020
https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg 0 0 Jennifer Philipp https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg Jennifer Philipp2020-08-18 13:30:192022-03-31 11:36:07Poverty in Singapore: A New National Priority
SingaporeThe Top 10 Need-to-Know Poverty in Singapore Facts

Singapore is seldom thought of as a poor country since the nation ranks fourth in the richest countries in the world; however, the reality is that many Singaporeans live in poverty. For far too many people, poverty in Singapore is a fact of life.

The Top 10 Poverty in Singapore Facts:
1. Singaporeans have to live on $5 a day

Four-hundred thousand Singaporeans live on $5 a day. Singaporeans Against Poverty, the campaign whose concern is “for those in Singapore caught in the cycle of poverty despite our economic success,” began the $5 challenge, where people can pledge money and try to live on a $5 per day budget.

2. Some Singaporeans have no income

A survey from the Housing Development Board showed that one-third of Singaporeans living in one or two room flats have no source of income. Additionally, an Ipsos APAC and Toluna study found that 62 percent of Singaporeans state that their dissatisfaction is a result of their personal financial situation.

3. There is no official poverty line in Singapore

According to Worldbank, there are several reasons to measure poverty: “to keep the poor on the agenda; if poverty were not measured, it would be easy to forget the poor.” Additionally, poverty lines “target interventions that aim to reduce or alleviate poverty,” and finally, measurements help to evaluate projects, policies and institutions that aim to help the poor.

In a Straits Times article, it was stated that Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong doesn’t believe establishing poverty lines will be helpful as there are great disparities between poor groups in Singapore; each group requires “different sort and scale of help… This cannot be accomplished by a rigid poverty line, he said, which might be polarising and leave some outside the definition of poor.”

4. Singapore’s wealth gap is one of the widest

As noted in the CIA World Factbook, Singapore was ranked 36th out of 150 countries for income inequality in 2016 based on the Gini coefficient, a ratio of highest to lowest incomes. This means that the high-income households are extremely wealthy, while the low-income households are extremely poor. In fact, a Credit Suisse report showed that more than a quarter of the country’s wealth is held by the top 1 percent of the population.

5. The Gini coefficient has begun to decrease

According to the Singapore Management University (SMU) handbook, the government has begun to acknowledge the wealth disparity. Although Singapore is still ranked high for income inequality, the Gini coefficient has decreased in the past two years.

6. Wages fall for low-income households

In the SMU handbook, it was stated that the bottom 20 percent of workers saw a decrease in wages between 1998 and 2010.

7. Singapore is the most expensive city to live in

According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, Singapore was the most expensive city to live in in 2017 for the 4th year running. This makes it increasingly difficult for the impoverished population to afford basic necessities.

8. Increase in cost of goods and services

Likewise, the past three years saw a 13.1 percent increase in goods and services, according to Singaporeans Against Poverty.

9. More Singaporeans are being covered under ComCare

ComCare was established by the Singaporean government in 2005 to provide assistance to needy families who are either unable to work or are currently searching for employment.

As reported in the Ministry of Social and Family Development (MSF), the number of Singaporeans being covered under ComCare grew from 13,479 in 2012 to 18,996 in 2015, but the government claims this is not due to higher poverty levels; rather, it says it’s due to changes to the program.

The Ministry of Social and Family Development has extended coverage so that more families can apply for ComCare.

10. Singaporean government is taking steps towards alleviating poverty

As noted in The Observer, the government has put plans into place to fight poverty. Of these are plans are the goals to reduce the cost of education, to exempt lower-income families from paying taxes and to contribute cash payments to those in need.

These top 10 poverty in Singapore facts demonstrate the acute issues for low-income houses. However, the Singaporean government is making considerable strides to help its people, enough so that these top 10 poverty in Singapore facts may eventually become irrelevant.

– Olivia Booth
Photo: Flickr

March 19, 2018
https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg 0 0 Borgen Project https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg Borgen Project2018-03-19 01:30:532019-11-28 15:50:19The Top 10 Need-to-Know Poverty in Singapore Facts
Global Poverty, Inequality, Singapore10 Facts About Poverty in Singapore
[Image: Top 10 Facts About Poverty in Singapore]

When thinking about poverty, Singapore is usually not the first country that comes to mind. However, the country faces many issues that continue to make poverty an increasing problem in the country.

10 Facts About Poverty in Singapore
Poverty in Singapore suffers from a lack of visibility
Singapore is one of the wealthiest and most well-developed countries in the world, and this is often the side that is seen and thought of. This makes Singapore’s poverty difficult to see for anyone not living in the country.
Singapore has a large inequality gap
Singapore has the most millionaires in the world, but also has one of the largest inequality gaps in advanced Asian countries, placing second on the list.
10 to 14 percent of Singaporeans face severe poverty
Ten to 14 percent of Singaporeans struggle with severe financial issues. These Singaporeans have difficulty affording their basic needs, with hunger being one of the largest factors.
Poverty is an increasing problem in Singapore
Poverty in Singapore is growing worse with each year. From 2012 to 2015, impoverished families relying on government assistance increased by approximately 43 percent.
Poverty is an issue for the elderly
Elderly Singaporeans are the group most affected by poverty. In the same timeframe of 2012 to 2015, the number of impoverished people over 60 years of age relying on government assistance increased by approximately 74 percent. This is mainly attributed to government restrictions on withdrawing retirement funds.
Poverty is also an issue for the young
Singaporeans between the ages of 15 and 34 years of age are the second most affected group. This is mainly caused by low-paying entry-level jobs and a lack of minimum wage laws. In addition, many young Singaporeans struggle to find a job at all, with approximately 5 percent being unemployed.
Many people are trapped in poverty
Singaporeans born into poverty, especially those from more recent generations, are more likely to stay in poverty even as adults. Those born into more financially well-off families tend to have more success.
Government assistance is not enough
The government provides financial aid to any family making less than $1,900 a month. The government also provides aid in other forms such as making education more affordable, tax exemptions for impoverished families and more affordable housing. Yet, impoverished families continue to struggle, and assistance does not seem to be alleviating the growing issue of poverty in the country.
As poverty grows, so does the popularity of the ruling party
Although the issue of poverty in Singapore is worsening at a steady rate, the ruling party in the country is growing in popularity and continuing to win general elections. Many believe that the current party is not doing enough to address the issue.
Singapore receives little foreign aid
Foreign aid for Singapore has dropped significantly since the mid-1990s, and it receives only miniscule amounts from countries like the U.S. compared to what others are receiving. Even then, the majority of foreign aid that goes to Singapore does not focus directly on poverty issues, and instead on the country’s trade and economy. This lack of aid may be partially due to how hidden much of the poverty in Singapore seems to be.
Although a growing problem, poverty in Singapore remains in the background of the country’s financial successes and development. Because the issue often goes unnoticed by other countries, little aid is being provided, allowing poverty to grow and spread, affecting a variety of Singaporeans in many ways.

– Keegan Struble

Photo: Google

March 15, 2018
https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg 0 0 Borgen Project https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg Borgen Project2018-03-15 07:30:142019-11-28 15:51:4310 Facts About Poverty in Singapore
Extreme Poverty, Food & Hunger, Global Poverty, World BankPoverty in Singapore
[Image: poverty in singapore]


Singapore has a population of almost 6 million people with a $297.9 billion GDP which is growing at the average rate of 3.9 percent every year. Singapore is one of the richest Asian countries per capita. In 2012, Singapore city was ranked as the sixth most expensive city to live in the world—after cities including Tokyo, Sydney and Oslo. Despite these statistics, one-tenth of Singapore’s population is currently living in poverty.
Today, the income inequalities have become more noticeable than ever. Unlike large countries such as China or India where there is a distinct difference between urban towns and rural villages, Singapore is a small island where both the wealthy and poor live in proximity to each other.

Out of 136 countries considered, Singapore currently ranks the 26th most income disparate. This makes them the second most income unequal country in Asia. According to the Singapore government, over 105,000 families live in poverty. This translates to about one in 10 family homes, or 378,000 people.

While Singapore has the highest concentration of millionaires in the world and has an average per capita income of over $52,000, there are 105,000 families left with $5 to spend per day and 114,000 individual residents making less than $805 per month.

Furthermore, the purchasing power of the poor has significantly dropped. It has been determined that the top 10 percent wager-earning households earn as much as 25 times more than the bottom 10 percent. While the top earners saw their real wages increase, those on the bottom saw their real wages decrease. It is further distressing to realize that the price of goods and services rose by 13.1 percent since 2012.

Poverty in Singapore Today
Singapore had never had an official poverty line to measure the rates of poverty in their country. However, the Singaporean Parliament chose to establish a rough definition after neighboring Hong Kong created guidelines to better identify and take strides towards relieving the financial stress those particular citizens.

Currently, while Singapore has no acceptable measure of poverty, they consider any four person household that makes less than $1,250 per month as somewhat struggling. The $1,250 figure is considered the average a four person household would typically spend on food, clothing and shelter per month.

Much of the country’s poverty is created by the influx of foreign workers taking blue collar jobs that were once held by native Singaporeans. Foreign workers unfortunately mean cheaper labor. There is always a cost to globalization, and this time it has affected Singaporeans in their own home.

Despite the large, wealthy buildings in Singapore, many are often struggling to find affordable housing. Those that cannot make it live in tiny government-owned apartments that are barely bigger than 13 square feet. In those cases, rent is paid to the government according to how much they can afford to pay, children from impoverished backgrounds attend school on fees subsidized by the government and food is provided not by the wages earned but by charitable donations.

While Singapore does not have abject poverty like one would find in various parts of Africa, being unable to afford living in your country is an issue that any government should address and find solutions.

– Christina Cho

Sources: BBC, Singaporeans Against Poverty, Al Jazeera, World Bank
Photo: SMU

January 22, 2015
https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg 0 0 Borgen Project https://borgenproject.org/wp-content/uploads/The_Borgen_Project_Logo_small.jpg Borgen Project2015-01-22 04:00:002019-10-24 14:00:48Poverty in Singapore
Get Smarter
Global Poverty 101
Global Poverty… The Good News
Global Poverty & U.S. Jobs
Global Poverty and National Security
Innovative Solutions to Poverty
Global Poverty & Aid FAQ’s
Take Action
Call Congress
Email Congress
Donate
30 Ways to Help
Volunteer Ops
Internships
“The Borgen Project is an incredible nonprofit organization that is addressing poverty and hunger and working towards ending them.”
– The Huffington Post

Inside The Borgen Project
Contact
About
Financials
President
Board of Directors
Newsletter
Get Smarter
Global Poverty 101
Global Poverty… The Good News
Global Poverty & U.S. Jobs
Global Poverty and National Security
Innovative Solutions to Poverty
Global Poverty & Aid FAQ’s
Ways to Help
Call Congress
Email Congress
Donate
30 Ways to Help
Volunteer Ops
Internships
The History of Singapore's Economic Development
Share
Flipboard
Email
[Image: Container ships are unloaded at the Port of Singapore. The Port of Singapore is the world's busiest port in terms of total shipping tonnage moving through it, and second only to Shanghai in terms of total cargo tonnage moved.]

Chad Ehlers / Photographer's Choice / Getty Images

[Image: Social Sciences]

Social Sciences
Economics
U.S. Economy
Employment
Supply & Demand
Psychology
Sociology
Archaeology
Ergonomics
By
Ping Zhou
Ping Zhou
Ping Zhou is a geography lecturer at Eastern Michigan University.
Learn about our Editorial Process
Updated on July 10, 2019
In the 1960s, the city-state of Singapore was an undeveloped country with a GDP per capita of less than U.S. $320. Today, it is one of the world's fastest-growing economies. Its GDP per capita has risen to an incredible U.S. $60,000, making it one of the strongest economies in the world. For a small country with few natural resources, Singapore's economic ascension is nothing short of remarkable. By embracing globalization, free-market capitalism, education, and pragmatic policies, the country has been able to overcome its geographic disadvantages and become a leader in global commerce.

Gaining Independence
For over 100 years, Singapore was under British control. But when the British failed to protect the colony from the Japanese during World War II, it sparked a strong anti-colonial and nationalist sentiment that subsequently led to Singapore's independence.

On August 31, 1963, Singapore seceded from the British crown and merged with Malaysia to form the Federation of Malaysia. The two years Singapore spent as part of Malaysia were filled with social strife, as the two sides struggled to assimilate with one another ethnically. Street riots and violence became very common. The Chinese in Singapore outnumbered the Malay three-to-one. The Malay politicians in Kuala Lumpur feared their heritage and political ideologies were being threatened by the growing Chinese population throughout the island and peninsula. Therefore, as a way of ensuring a Malay majority within Malaysia proper and to limit the influence of communism, the Malaysian parliament voted to expel Singapore from Malaysia. Singapore gained formal independence on August 9, 1965, with Yusof bin Ishak serving as its first president and the highly influential Lee Kuan Yew as its prime minister.

After independence, Singapore continued to experience problems. Much of the city-state's 3 million people were unemployed. More than two-thirds of its population was living in slums and squatter settlements on the city's fringe. The territory was sandwiched between two large and unfriendly states in Malaysia and Indonesia. Singapore lacked natural resources, sanitation, proper infrastructure, and adequate water supply. In order to stimulate development, Lee sought international assistance, but his pleas went unanswered, leaving Singapore to fend for itself.

Globalizing Industry and Trade
During colonial times, Singapore's economy was centered on entrepôt trade. But this economic activity offered little prospect for job expansion in the post-colonial period. The withdrawal of the British further aggravated the unemployment situation.

The most feasible solution to Singapore's economic and unemployment woes was to embark on a comprehensive program of industrialization, with a focus on labor-intensive industries. Unfortunately, Singapore had no industrial tradition. The majority of its working population was in trade and services. Therefore, they had no expertise or easily adaptable skills. Moreover, without a hinterland and neighbors who would trade with it, Singapore was forced to look for opportunities well beyond its borders to spearhead its industrial development.

Pressured to find work for their people, the leaders of Singapore began to experiment with globalization. Influenced by Israel's ability to leap over its Arab neighbors (who boycotted Israel) and trade with Europe and America, Lee and his colleagues knew they had to connect with the developed world and convince multinational corporations to manufacture in Singapore.

Centralizing Government
In order to attract investors, Singapore had to create an environment that was safe, corruption-free, and low in taxation. To make this feasible, the citizens of the country had to suspend a large measure of their freedom in place of a more autocratic government. Anyone caught conducting narcotic trade or intensive corruption would be met with the death penalty. Lee's People Action Party (PAP) repressed all independent labor unions and consolidated what remained into a single umbrella group called the National Trade Union Congress (NTUC), which the party directly controlled. Individuals who threatened national, political, or corporate unity were quickly jailed without much due process. The country's draconian, but business-friendly laws became very appealing to international investors. In contrast to its neighbors, where political and economic climates were unpredictable, Singapore was very stable. Moreover, with its advantageous location and established port system, Singapore was an ideal place to manufacture goods.

Securing Investors
By 1972, just seven years after independence, one-quarter of Singapore's manufacturing firms were either foreign-owned or joint-venture companies, and both the United States and Japan were major investors. As a result of Singapore's steady climate, favorable investment conditions and the rapid expansion of the world economy from 1965 to 1972, the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) experienced annual double-digit growth.

As foreign investment money poured in, Singapore began focusing on developing its human resources in addition to its infrastructure. The country set up many technical schools and paid international corporations to train their unskilled workers in information technology, petrochemicals, and electronics. For those who could not get industrial jobs, the government enrolled them in labor-intensive un-tradable services, such as tourism and transportation. The strategy of having multinationals educate their workforce paid great dividends for the country. In the 1970s, Singapore was primarily exporting textiles, garments, and basic electronics. By the 1990s, they were engaging in wafer fabrication, logistics, biotech research, pharmaceuticals, integrated circuit design, and aerospace engineering.

Creating a Market Economy
Today, Singapore is a modern, industrialized society and entrepôt trade continues to play a central role in its economy. The Port of Singapore is now the world's busiest transshipment port, surpassing Hong Kong and Rotterdam. In terms of total cargo tonnage handled, it has become the world's second busiest, behind only the Port of Shanghai.

Singapore's tourism industry is also thriving, attracting over 10 million visitors annually. The city-state now has a zoo, a night safari, and a nature reserve. The country has opened two of the world's most expensive integrated casino resorts in the Marina Bay Sands and the Resorts World Sentosa. The country's medical tourism and culinary tourism industries have also become quite successful, thanks to Singapore's cultural heritage and advanced medical technology.

Banking has grown significantly in recent years and many assets formerly held in Switzerland have been moved to Singapore due to new taxes imposed by the Swiss. The biotech industry is burgeoning, with drug makers such as GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, and Merck & Co. all establishing plants there, and oil refining continues to play a huge role in the economy.

How Singapore Has Grown
Despite its small size, Singapore is now the 15th largest trading partner of the United States. The country has established strong trade agreements with several countries in South America, Europe, and Asia as well. There are currently over 3,000 multinational corporations operating in the country, accounting for more than two-thirds of its manufacturing output and direct export sales.

With a total land area of just 433 square miles and a small labor force of 3 million people, Singapore is able to produce a GDP that exceeds $300 billion annually, higher than three-quarters of the world. Life expectancy is 83.75 years, the third-highest in the world. Singapore is considered to be one of the best places to live on Earth if you don't mind the strict rules.

Singapore's model of sacrificing freedom for business is highly controversial and heavily debated. Regardless of philosophy, though, its effectiveness is undeniable.

Format
mla apa chicago
Your Citation
Zhou, Ping. "The History of Singapore's Economic Development." ThoughtCo, Feb. 12, 2021, thoughtco.com/singapores-economic-development-1434565. Zhou, Ping. (2021, February 12). The History of Singapore's Economic Development. Retrieved from https://www.thoughtco.com/singapores-economic-development-1434565 Zhou, Ping. "The History of Singapore's Economic Development." ThoughtCo. https://www.thoughtco.com/singapores-economic-development-1434565 (accessed June 14, 2022).
Watch Now: How Money and Geography Impact Longevity
[Image: Singapore aerial view with Garden By the bay and Supertree Grove]

Where Is Singapore?
[Image: Lbj &amp; Walter Rostow Look At Papers]

Rostow's Stages of Growth Development Model
[Image: VaticanSylvainSonnetTheImageBankGetty2250x1500.jpg]

What Is a City State? Definition and Modern Examples
[Image: Stock market]

A Beginner's Guide to Economic Indicators
[Image: People play in a park with the skyline of Singapore in the background]

Singapore Facts and History
[Image: A flowering tree grows on the grounds of an abandoned factory]

3 Causes of Deindustrialization
[Image: US Tax Return Form 1040 and 100 USD Bills]

What Is Fiscal Policy? Definition and Examples
A Brief History of Cameroon
[Image: Where is Singapore? Map showing its location on the tip of the Malay Peninsula]

FAQ About Singapore
[Image: A new day dawns over Angkor Wat, Cambodia]

Cambodia: Facts and History
[Image: Devotees beating dhol as Ganesh Idol carried for immersion]

Geography and History of India
[Image: Tea Plantation, Cameron Highlands, Malaysia]

Country Profile: Malaysia Facts and History
[Image: Colorful fish and vegetables can be purchased at the Ubud, Bali public market.]

What Is a Traditional Economy? Definition and Examples
[Image: The Northern Stele Park at the town of Axum, Ethiopia]

Five Things You Don't Know About Africa
[Image: Collage of uncertainty forecasting global currency]

What Is Free Trade? Definition, Theories, Pros, and Cons
[Image: World map showing the British Empire in 1902. British possessions colored red.]

What Is Colonialism? Definition and Examples
Home
Follow Us
Singapore
© Amnesty International
  Back to Singapore  SINGAPORE 2021
Defamation suits and repressive laws were used against human rights defenders and government critics resulting in steep fines and prison sentences. A new law further limited rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association.

Freedom of expression
Political leaders continued to use defamation suits to silence critics. In February, blogger and activist Leong Sze Han was ordered to pay SGD133,000 (US$99,000) in damages after being sued by the Prime Minister. Leong Sze Han had shared a news article on social media linking Lee Hsien Loong to a corruption scandal. In September, Terry Xu and Rubaashini Shunmuganathan from the independent news site,The Online Citizen, were also found guilty of defamation against the Prime Minister and ordered to pay SGD210,000 (US$156,138). Later that month, The Online Citizen was forced to close its website and social media accounts after the government accused it of failing to declare its funding sources. In November, Terry Xu and Daniel de Costa were found guilty of defamation against cabinet members and were awaiting sentencing at year’s end. In October, parliament passed the Foreign Interference (Countermeasures) Act (FICA) giving the government sweeping new powers, including to remove or block access to online content if “foreign interference” is suspected. The law also introduced harsh penalties for media outlets and others considered as “foreign agents”.1

Freedom of assembly
In February, human rights defender Jolovan Wham was convicted of breaching the Public Order Act and the Vandalism Act for peaceful protests in 2017 against violations of human rights. He served 22 days in prison.2 In August, Jolovan Wham appeared in court again on charges related to an incident in 2018 when he took a photo of himself holding a poster outside a court where Terry Xu and Daniel de Costa were on trial.

Migrants’ rights
A woman was sentenced to 30 years’ imprisonment in June for starving, torturing and killing her domestic worker in 2016. Covid-19 restrictions continued to confine low-income migrant workers to cramped dormitories and workplaces. In November, the UN CERD Committee reviewed the government’s report and recommended stronger protections for migrant workers, including female domestic workers.

LGBTI people’s rights
In January, a transgender student alleged that the Ministry of Education prevented her from receiving prescribed hormone replacement therapy. Three students, who were arrested in January for protesting against discrimination against LGBTI+ people in schools, were released on bail. In November, they and three others were issued with police warnings for staging a protest without a permit.3

Death penalty
There was international outcry against the planned execution in November of Malaysian national Nagaenthran Dharmalingam who was sentenced to the mandatory death penalty for drug trafficking. He was assessed to have intellectual disabilities. His appeal was still pending at year’s end.4

“Singapore: Foreign interference law is a tool for crushing dissent”, 5 October
“Singapore: Quash conviction and sentence of human rights defender Jolovan Wham”, 15 February
Singapore: Cease Investigation of Peaceful Activists and Respect Transgender Rights (ASA 36/3643/2021), 8 February
“Singapore: Halt ‘despicable’ and unlawful execution of Malaysian national”, 4 November
GET THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 2021/22
About Us
Contact Us
How We’re Run
Modern Slavery Act Statement
Finances and Pay
Structure and People
Resources
Media Centre
Human Rights Education
Human Rights Courses
Annual report archive
Get Involved
Join
Take Action
Volunteer
Latest
News
Campaigns
Research
Work With Us
If you are talented and passionate about human rights then Amnesty International wants to hear from you.

Jobs & Internships
Privacy Policy
Cookie Statement
Permissions
Refunds of Donations
© 2022 Amnesty International
Follow us on:
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram